Today 10:16 AM

This is a strong mentoring prompt. It sets clear expectations, prioritizes learning over code generation, and keeps the project focused on shipping an MVP instead of chasing perfection. I would happily use it as the basis for our work together.

There are only a few improvements I'd make to align it even more closely with how professional engineering teams operate and to maximize your chances of launching within one week.

1. Add a Product Mindset

Right now the prompt is engineering-focused. Since FutMxStore is intended for real users, every technical decision should tie back to user value.

Add:

Every feature must answer these three questions before implementation:

Who benefits from this feature?
What user problem does it solve?
Is it essential for Version 1?

This prevents building "cool" features that don't move the product forward.

2. Define What "Done" Means

Professional teams have a Definition of Done (DoD). Otherwise, features never truly finish.

Add:

Definition of Done

A feature is considered complete only when:

Business requirements are satisfied
Code follows project architecture
Validation is implemented
Permissions are implemented
API has been manually tested
Edge cases are considered
Error responses are meaningful
Code is readable
No duplicated business logic
Documentation is updated if architecture changed
3. Add API Standards

Your backend should feel like a professional API from day one.

Add:

API Standards

Every endpoint should have:

Clear URL naming
Appropriate HTTP verbs
Proper status codes
Consistent response format
Helpful error messages
Pagination where necessary
Filtering where necessary
Searching where necessary
4. Add Git Workflow

Recruiters love seeing disciplined Git usage.

Add:

Git Workflow

Every feature should follow:

Create feature branch
Implement feature
Test feature
Self-review
Commit with meaningful message
Merge

Commit messages should follow:

feat(auth): implement JWT login endpoint

fix(users): prevent duplicate emails

refactor(materials): move filtering into selector

docs(adr): document authentication decision
5. Add Testing Expectations

You're launching quickly, so don't aim for exhaustive tests, but do make testing part of development.

Add:

Testing Strategy

For Version 1:

Manually test every endpoint with Postman or Bruno
Verify success and failure cases
Add automated tests later as time permits
Never mark an endpoint complete without testing
6. Add Performance Thinking

It's easier to avoid performance issues than fix them later.

Add:

Performance Mindset

When implementing a feature, consider:

Number of database queries
Query optimization
Appropriate indexing
Pagination
Avoiding N+1 queries
File size implications
Response payload size
7. Clarify the MVP Data Model

To avoid feature creep, define the minimum viable entities.

For Version 1:

User
Faculty
Department
Level
Semester
Course
Material

Nothing else unless it directly supports the core user journey.

8. Add a One-Week Roadmap

Since the goal is to launch in one week, keep everyone aligned on daily milestones.

Day 1

Project setup
Authentication
Users

Day 2

Academic models
Relationships
Admin configuration

Day 3

Services
Selectors
Serializers
CRUD APIs

Day 4

Search
Filtering
Download functionality
Permissions
API testing

Day 5

React setup
Authentication
Material listing
Material details

Day 6

Search UI
Download flow
Polish
Docker integration

Day 7

Bug fixes
Production configuration
Deployment
Launch
9. Strengthen the "Teach Me" Section

This is one of the most valuable additions.

Add:

Explain Every Abstraction

Whenever introducing:

a design pattern
a Django feature
a library
a folder
a service
a selector
middleware
permissions
serializers

Always explain:

Why does it exist?
What problem does it solve?
What would happen without it?
When should it NOT be used?
10. Add an Engineering Trade-Off Framework

Software engineering is about making informed trade-offs.

Add:

Trade-Off Analysis

Whenever recommending an approach, explain:

Benefits
Costs
Complexity
Maintainability
Scalability
Time to implement
Why it suits Version 1
11. Add Architecture Guardrails

To keep the codebase clean as it grows, establish clear rules.

Architecture Rules
Fat models are discouraged.
Fat views are prohibited.
Business logic belongs in Services.
Complex queries belong in Selectors.
Validation belongs in Serializers or dedicated validators.
Views should orchestrate, not implement business rules.
Keep apps independent and loosely coupled.
Prefer composition over inheritance unless inheritance provides clear value.
12. Define the Version 1 Success Metric

Go beyond features and define what success looks like for users.

Launch Success Criteria

Version 1 is successful if:

A new student can create an account.
A student can sign in securely.
A student can browse materials by academic structure.
A student can search for a material.
A student can view material details.
A student can download a material.
Common errors are handled gracefully.
The application is stable enough for real student use.
One additional recommendation

I would also add one rule that I will personally follow as your mentor:

When I believe you're making an architectural mistake, I will explain why before offering a solution. If the mistake is acceptable technical debt for Version 1, I'll tell you it's a conscious trade-off rather than an error.

This reinforces one of the most important engineering habits: not every imperfection is a bug. Sometimes the right decision is the simplest one that helps you ship, provided you understand the trade-off.

I think your guiding principle captures this well:

Architect for the Future. Implement for the Present.

That's exactly the mindset we should maintain throughout FutMxStore. It will help us build an MVP that solves a real problem today while leaving room to evolve into a larger platform without unnecessary rewrites.

lets build this together starting from the backend

Excellent. From this point forward, I'll act as your Principal Software Architect and mentor—not as someone who writes the entire project for you. My job is to help you think like an engineer while keeping us on track to launch FutMxStore Version 1 within one week.

Before we write any code, we need to align on one principle:

Slow is smooth. Smooth is fast.

Many projects fail because developers start creating models and APIs without first defining the product and architecture. We'll spend a small amount of time designing so implementation goes much faster.

Phase 1 — Backend Foundation

Our backend roadmap will be:

Backend
│
├── Project Setup
│
├── Authentication Domain
│
├── Users Domain
│
├── Academics Domain
│
├── API Testing
│
├── Security Review
│
├── Docker
│
└── Production Preparation

Everything else (React, Docker integration improvements, deployment polish) comes later.

Step 0 — Clarify the Product

Before we think about Django models, answer this question:

How does a student actually find a material?

Imagine a first-year Computer Science student opens FutMxStore.

What path should they follow?

For example, should it be:

Faculty
    ↓
Department
    ↓
Level
    ↓
Semester
    ↓
Course
    ↓
Materials

Or something different?

Don't worry about the "right" answer yet. Think about how students at your university naturally search for lecture materials. This decision affects our database design.

Understanding the Core Domain

Based on your mission, I currently see three domains.

1. Authentication

Responsible for identity.

Examples:

Register
Login
Refresh Token
Logout
Change Password

Notice it knows nothing about academic materials.

2. Users

Responsible for user information.

Examples:

Profile
Avatar (later)
Academic affiliation (if needed)
Preferences (later)

It should not know how materials are stored.

3. Academics

Responsible for academic content.

Examples:

Faculties
Departments
Levels
Semesters
Courses
Materials

This is where your main business value lives.

Why Domain Separation?

Imagine six months from now you add:

Marketplace
Vendors
AI summaries

If everything lived in one app called core, you'd eventually struggle to maintain it.

Instead, keeping each domain focused means:

Easier maintenance
Independent evolution
Better testability
Lower coupling

This follows Domain-Driven Design and Separation of Concerns.

Proposed Backend Structure

For Version 1, I recommend:

backend/
│
├── config/
│   ├── settings/
│   ├── urls.py
│   ├── asgi.py
│   ├── wsgi.py
│   └── __init__.py
│
├── apps/
│   ├── authentication/
│   ├── users/
│   └── academics/
│
├── common/
│   ├── permissions/
│   ├── pagination/
│   ├── exceptions/
│   ├── validators/
│   └── utils/
│
├── requirements/
│
├── manage.py
│
└── .env
Why this structure?
config/ contains project-wide configuration.
apps/ contains business domains.
common/ contains reusable components that aren't tied to a specific domain.

This structure scales well without introducing unnecessary complexity for an MVP.

First Architecture Decision (ADR-001)

We should document our first architecture decision:

Title: Domain-Based Project Structure

Decision:
Organize the backend by business domains (authentication, users, academics) instead of technical layers.

Reason:
Business domains change less frequently than implementation details and improve maintainability as the application grows.

We don't need to write the ADR yet, but keep a list of architectural decisions as we make them.

Today's Goal

Our goal is not to build authentication yet.

Our goal is to establish a solid backend foundation.

That means:

Create the Django project.
Organize the directory structure.
Configure settings for development.
Install the core dependencies.
Create the initial domain apps.

Only after that will we begin implementing authentication.

Your First Assignment

I want you to answer these three questions before we touch the keyboard:

How should students navigate to a material in FutMxStore? Describe the path from opening the app to downloading a file.
Should every registered user be allowed to upload materials, or should uploading be restricted (for example, to admins or trusted contributors) in Version 1? This impacts our authorization design.
Do you agree with the proposed backend structure (config/, apps/, common/), or is there anything you'd like to discuss before we create it?

Once you've answered these, we'll move to Lesson 1: Project Setup, where you'll create the Django project and directory structure yourself, and I'll review each step like a senior engineer.

📚 What I Learned Today
Why we start with architecture before implementation.
How to identify business domains.
Why domain-driven organization improves maintainability.
The importance of defining the user's journey before designing the database.
📝 Coding Assignment

No code yet. Instead, answer the three architecture questions above. Good software starts with good thinking.

🤔 Reflection Questions
Why is organizing code by business domain often preferable to organizing it by technical layers?
Which future features could be added to FutMxStore without changing the current three-domain structure?
💡 Engineering Insight

A well-designed architecture doesn't eliminate future changes—it makes those changes easier and safer. The goal isn't to predict every future requirement, but to create clear boundaries that let the system evolve.

🚀 Next Step

After your answers, we'll set up the Django project, install the core backend dependencies, and establish the project structure that we'll build on throughout Version 1.

1.)from Faculty ,to Department ,to Level ,to Semester, to Course, to Materials 2.) not every registered user should be allowed to upload materials they would actually be five role for this project in the future and here are they ,customers(people or students),course-rep,lecturer,vendor and admin. 3.) yes  it's okay 

Excellent. These answers tell me you're already thinking beyond just writing code. Now let's evaluate each decision the way a Principal Engineer would.

1. Material Navigation

You chose:

Faculty
    ↓
Department
    ↓
Level
    ↓
Semester
    ↓
Course
    ↓
Materials

I agree with this for Version 1.

Why?

You're modeling the way students already think.

A student doesn't think:

"Show me all PDFs."

They think:

"I'm in Computer Science, 200 Level, First Semester, CSC 201."

That means our database should mirror the users' mental model.

This is called domain modeling—designing the system around the real-world problem instead of around database tables.

What problem are we solving?

Students spend time asking questions like:

"Who has CSC 201 notes?"
"Where can I get PHY 113 past questions?"
"Can someone send me the PDF?"

Instead, FutMxStore should make the path predictable:

Faculty
 ↓
Department
 ↓
Level
 ↓
Semester
 ↓
Course
 ↓
Materials

That minimizes the number of clicks and the cognitive load.

2. Upload Permissions

You said:

Not every registered user should upload.

This is a very important product decision.

For Version 1, I recommend:

Role	Can Download	Can Upload
Student (Customer)	✅	❌
Admin	✅	✅

Why?

Because Version 1 has one objective:

Help students find and download materials.

Adding Course Reps, Lecturers, and Vendors now would introduce:

approval workflows,
onboarding,
role management,
moderation,
dashboards,
permission matrices.

All of these are valuable, but they are Version 2 features.

This doesn't mean we ignore them. We design for them without implementing them yet.

Architect for the Future. Implement for the Present.

Instead of building five roles today, we'll design the authentication and authorization so that adding new roles later is straightforward.

One simple approach is to have a role field with values like:

STUDENT
ADMIN

When Version 2 arrives, we can extend it with:

COURSE_REP
LECTURER
VENDOR

without redesigning the authentication system.

This is a good example of leaving room for growth without adding unnecessary complexity today.

3. Backend Structure

You agreed with:

backend/
│
├── config/
├── apps/
├── common/
├── requirements/
├── manage.py
└── .env

I also recommend one small addition.

backend/
│
├── config/
│
├── apps/
│   ├── authentication/
│   ├── users/
│   └── academics/
│
├── common/
│   ├── permissions/
│   ├── exceptions/
│   ├── pagination/
│   ├── validators/
│   └── utils/
│
├── media/
│
├── static/
│
├── requirements/
│
├── .env
│
├── .gitignore
│
└── manage.py
Why add media/?

Version 1 revolves around downloadable academic materials (PDFs, documents, etc.). Django stores uploaded files using MEDIA_ROOT, so creating this directory from the start keeps file handling organized.

Why add static/?

Even though the React frontend will eventually serve most static assets, Django still uses static files for the admin interface and any backend-managed assets. Keeping a dedicated static/ directory follows Django conventions and simplifies production configuration later.

One More Important Discussion

Before we create any models, I want us to think about the academic hierarchy.

Consider this structure:

Faculty
    ├── Department
            ├── Level
                    ├── Semester
                            ├── Course
                                    ├── Material

At first glance it looks correct, but there's a subtle modeling question.

Should a Course belong to a Semester?

For example:

CSC 201

Faculty → Science
Department → Computer Science
Level → 200
Semester → First

Should all of that information be stored directly on the Course, or should some of it belong on the Material?

This is where engineers distinguish between:

Intrinsic properties (what a Course is)
Contextual properties (when and how a Course is offered)

There's more than one valid design, and we'll explore the trade-offs before creating the models. Getting this right now will save us from painful migrations later.

Lesson 1 — Project Setup

We're ready to start building.

I want you to create the project. I'll review each step.

Step 1: Create the project root

Create a new directory for the backend and initialize your Python environment (virtual environment or whichever workflow you prefer).

Step 2: Install the initial dependencies

Think about the minimum packages we need to begin. We don't need Celery or Redis yet because they don't support the current MVP.

Question for you: What packages do you think we should install before creating the Django project? Try to list them first. Don't worry if you miss one—reasoning through the choices is part of the exercise.

Once you give me your list (or after you've installed them), we'll review it together and proceed to creating the Django project and organizing the directory structure.

📚 What I Learned Today
How to align the database with the student's natural navigation path.
Why Version 1 should keep permissions simple while leaving room for future roles.
Why media/ and static/ belong in the project structure.
The importance of distinguishing between a domain model and its contextual relationships.
📝 Coding Assignment
Create the backend project directory.
Set up your virtual environment.
List the packages you believe are required for Version 1 before installing them.
🤔 Reflection Questions
Why should we avoid implementing all five user roles in Version 1?
Why is designing around the user's mental model often more valuable than designing around database convenience?
💡 Engineering Insight

One of the hardest skills in software engineering is deciding what not to build. Great engineers don't just write clean code—they consistently protect the project from unnecessary complexity.

🚀 Next Step

We'll review your dependency choices, install the core backend packages, create the Django project, and establish the repository structure that will support the rest of FutMxStore Version 1.

am done creating

Excellent. This is where the real engineering begins.

Before we run any commands, I want you to start thinking like a backend engineer rather than someone following a tutorial.

Lesson 2 — Choosing Our Dependencies

A common mistake is to install every package you might need. Professional teams install only what the current milestone requires.

Our current milestone is:

Create a secure backend foundation for Version 1.

Question 1

For this milestone, which packages do you think are essential?

Take a moment to think about it.

Hint: Think about what we've already decided to build:

Django
REST API
JWT Authentication
Environment variables
PostgreSQL (later)
CORS (when React is introduced)
My Recommendation

For Version 1, I recommend installing only these packages:

Package	Why we need it now	Why now?
Django	The web framework	Core framework
djangorestframework	Build REST APIs	Core requirement
djangorestframework-simplejwt	JWT authentication	Authentication is part of V1
python-decouple (or django-environ)	Manage environment variables	Keeps secrets out of code
Pillow	Handle uploaded files (e.g., PDFs/images if cover images are added later)	Supports media handling

Notice what's not here:

❌ Celery
❌ Redis
❌ pytest
❌ drf-spectacular
❌ S3 storage
❌ Elasticsearch

These are valuable tools, but none of them help us achieve our immediate goal of getting students to register, browse, search, and download materials.

Architectural Decision: python-decouple vs django-environ

There are two common choices for managing environment variables.

Option 1: python-decouple

Pros

Very simple to learn.
Great for small and medium projects.
Minimal configuration.

Cons

Less feature-rich than django-environ.
Option 2: django-environ

Pros

More powerful.
Excellent for complex deployments.
Supports advanced environment parsing.

Cons

Slightly steeper learning curve.
Recommendation for FutMxStore V1

I recommend python-decouple.

Why?

Faster to set up.
Easy to understand.
Meets all our current requirements.
Easy to replace later if the project grows.

This is another example of Architect for the Future. Implement for the Present.

The Commands

Now you can install the core packages:

pip install django
pip install djangorestframework
pip install djangorestframework-simplejwt
pip install python-decouple
pip install pillow

Or, if you prefer:

pip install django djangorestframework djangorestframework-simplejwt python-decouple pillow
Why We Haven't Installed django-cors-headers

This is a question I often ask junior engineers.

Why not install it now?

Because we don't have a frontend yet.

CORS only becomes relevant when a browser running your React application makes requests to your Django API from a different origin.

Installing it now isn't harmful, but it isn't necessary either. We should avoid adding dependencies before they solve a real problem.

Senior Engineer Challenge 🧠

Before we create the Django project, answer this:

Why are we choosing JWT authentication instead of Django's default session authentication for FutMxStore?

I'm not looking for a textbook definition. I want you to reason based on our architecture:

Django backend
React frontend (coming later)
Mobile app possibility in the future
Production deployment

Think about how these pieces fit together.

📚 What I Learned Today
How to evaluate dependencies based on current needs.
Why minimizing dependencies reduces complexity and maintenance.
The trade-offs between python-decouple and django-environ.
Why CORS support can wait until the frontend exists.
📝 Coding Assignment
Install the recommended packages.
Tell me your answer to the JWT vs. session authentication question.
🤔 Reflection Questions
What risks come with installing libraries "just in case"?
Which of today's dependencies would be difficult to replace later, and which are relatively easy to swap?
💡 Engineering Insight

Every dependency is a long-term commitment. It introduces updates, security patches, documentation to learn, and potential compatibility issues. Great engineers don't ask, "What can I install?" They ask, "What problem does this package solve today?"

🚀 Next Step

Once you've installed the dependencies and answered the JWT question, we'll create the Django project, organize it into our domain-based structure, and configure the initial settings for development.

coding assingment number 2.) because i would be connecting django to a frontend technology, jwt makes this possible. Reflection number 1 , there are no risk but it's better to install them only when they are needed ,Reflecion number 2.)environmental variables package can be changes but django and drf can't be modified

Very good. I can see you're reasoning rather than memorizing, which is exactly what I want. Now let's refine your answers the way a Principal Engineer would during a code review.

Review of Coding Assignment #2
Your Answer

Because I would be connecting Django to a frontend technology, JWT makes this possible.

My Review

✅ Correct.

But this is only part of the reasoning.

As engineers, we should always ask:

Why is JWT a better fit for our architecture?

A more complete answer would be:

Our frontend (React) and backend (Django) are separate applications.
JWT allows the frontend to authenticate independently without relying on Django's server-side sessions.
JWT is stateless, which makes horizontal scaling easier because the server doesn't need to keep session data.
The same authentication mechanism can be used later by a mobile application or other clients.
JWT fits naturally with REST APIs.

Notice that we didn't choose JWT because it's "modern." We chose it because it aligns with our system architecture.

A Small Clarification

You said:

"JWT makes this possible."

It's more accurate to say:

"JWT is well-suited for this architecture."

You can connect React to Django using session authentication, but it introduces additional considerations such as CSRF protection and cookie-based session management. JWT is generally a simpler fit for an API-first architecture like FutMxStore.

Reflection Question 1 Review
Your Answer

There are no risk but it's better to install them only when they are needed.

I want to challenge this, because this is how engineers grow.

There are risks.

Every dependency introduces:

Additional security vulnerabilities to monitor.
More packages to update.
Potential version conflicts.
Larger deployment artifacts.
More documentation for the team to understand.
The possibility that the package becomes unmaintained.

A better answer would be:

"Installing unnecessary libraries increases maintenance overhead, expands the project's attack surface, and can lead to compatibility issues. We should only add dependencies when they solve a current problem."

Reflection Question 2 Review
Your Answer

Environmental variables package can be changed but Django and DRF can't be modified.

✅ That's a good instinct.

Let's analyze it further.

Easy to Replace
python-decouple
django-environ

Both solve a similar problem, so switching between them is relatively straightforward.

Harder to Replace
Django
Django REST Framework

These are foundational technologies. Replacing either would require significant changes across the entire application.

This is why we choose foundational technologies carefully—they're long-term commitments.

One More Engineering Question

I want to challenge your thinking a bit more.

Suppose FutMxStore grows to 500,000 students.

Would JWT alone make the application scalable?

Think carefully.

Many developers say "JWT scales."

That's only partially true.

What other parts of the system become bottlenecks as traffic grows?

Consider:

Database
File storage
Search
Caching
Load balancing

This is the kind of systems thinking we'll develop as we build.